Title: DermNet Bleeding and bruising
Source URL: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/bleeding-and-bruising
Credibility: DermNet dermatology reference
Downloaded as text for local retrieval.

Bleeding and bruising 

Search DermNet Ctrl K 

Are you a healthcare professional 
GO TO DERMNET PRO 

Home 
Topics A-Z 
Images 
Cases 
Skin checker 
Give feedback 

Main menu 

Home 
Topics A-Z 
Images 
Cases 
Skin checker 
Give feedback 

Common skin conditions 
Acne Athlete's foot Cellulitis Cold sores Dermatitis/Eczema Heat rash Hives Impetigo Psoriasis Ringworm Rosacea Seborrhoeic dermatitis Shingles Vitiligo 

NEWS 
Join DermNet PRO 

Read more 

Quick links 

Skin checker 
Try our skin symptom checker 

Home 

Topics A-Z 

Bleeding and bruising 

Bleeding and bruising — extra information 

Synonyms: 
Contusion, Haemorrhage, Haematoma, Petechiae, Ecchymosis 

Categories: 
Blood vessel problems 

ICD-10: 
T14.0, T23.3, R58, L60.8 

ICD-11: 
N56.0, MG27, NC50 

SNOMED CT: 
125667009, 131148009, 297968009, 308492005, 302227002, 269219004 

ADVERTISEMENT 

Blood vessel problems 
Bleeding and bruising 

Author: Sonam Vadera, Medical Student, University College London, United Kingdom. DermNet New Zealand Editor in Chief: A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand. Copy Editor: Gus Mitchell. September 2017. 
Introduction - bleeding 
Introduction - bruising 
Demographics 
Causes 
Symptoms 
Tests 
Medical care 
Treatment 
Outcome 
Prevention 

What is bleeding? 
Bleeding, also called haemorrhage , is the term used to describe blood escaping from the blood vessels. Bleeding from the skin occurs if there is an injury to the skin surface, and it may sometimes occur spontaneously. Smaller areas of bleeding are known as petechiae (each spot is < 2 mm) and purpura (2 mm to 1 cm). 
Subungual haemorrhage , or bleeding under a nail plate, results in painful or unnoticed purplish-black discolouration. The discolouration may persist for months as the nail carries the blood with it as it grows out. 

Bleeding basal cell carcinoma 

Crusted squamous cell carcinoma 

Subungual haematoma 
What is bruising? 
A bruise, also known as ecchymosis or a contusion, occurs when small blood vessels ( capillaries ) under the skin bleed, while the overlying skin remains intact. The injury causes blood to leak and collect near the skin surface, causing bluish-black skin discolouration. 
Deeper bruising results in a haematoma — a collection of blood that lies within body tissues or cavities. 

Traumatic bruise 

Bruising at the site of heparin injections 

Ecchymoses associated with skin atrophy 
Who bleeds/bruises? 
Anyone can bleed from a cut or develop a bruise after an injury. The severity of bleeding depends on the impact of an injury. Repeated bleeding from a skin lesion with minimal provocation can be a sign of skin cancer , most often basal cell carcinoma . 
Occasional bruises are normal and do not warrant medical attention. Bleeding and bruises are more common in certain individuals, such as: 
People with lighter skin tones, where bruises are more visible 
People who exercise a lot or who play contact sports 
Older people, as the walls of their blood vessels, weaken and their skin becomes thinner 
People with an inherited or acquired coagulation disorder. 
Bruising occurs more readily in certain sites where blood accumulates easily, such as when a relatively minor bump results in a black eye. 
What causes bleeding and bruising? 
After an injury, the body immediately attempts to stop any blood loss. 
Platelets accumulate and block any defects in the blood vessel walls. 
Blood vessels constrict. 
Clotting factors are released. 
Defects in any of these three responses can lead to spontaneous or excessive bleeding and bruising. 
Platelets can be dysfunctional or decreased in number. This can be due to conditions, such as: 
Aplastic anaemia 
Leukaemia 
Autoimmune disorders , such as systemic lupus erythematosus 
Disseminated intravascular coagulation 
Haemolytic uraemic syndrome 
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura 
Kidney disease 
Drugs that affect platelets (eg, aspirin and clopidogrel), such as drugs prescribed to prevent heart attacks and strokes, and non-steroidal anti- inflammatory drugs. 
Blood vessel defects, where the vessels are twisted or enlarged, include: 
Vasculitis 
Vitamin C deficiency 
Marfan syndrome 
Ehlers–Danlos syndrome . 
A clotting factor deficiency may be due to drugs that affect clotting factors (eg, warfarin, heparin, rivaroxaban and apixaban). These are often prescribed for atrial fibrillation or a recent blood clot in veins or lungs. A clotting factor deficiency can also be a result of a medical condition, such as: 
Liver disease 
Haemophilia 
Vitamin K deficiency 
Von Willebrand disease 
Deficiencies in other clotting factors. 
The use of systemic or topical steroids can also increase the likelihood of bruising. 

Bruises due to haemophilia 

Petechiae due to thrombocytopaenia 

Petechiae due to thrombocytopaenia 
What are the symptoms of bleeding and bruises? 
Larger blood vessels, such as arteries , lead to more profuse and prolonged bleeding than smaller ones, such as capillaries. Once bleeding has stopped, a blackish crust or scab forms while the wound heals underneath. 
Typically, a bruise first appears as a reddish patch , which develops over a few hours into a blue, black or purple discolouration. It may feel tender immediately after bruising, and the area may be swollen. Over a few days, the colour fades to a yellowish-green, as the leaked blood breaks down. 
What tests may be performed? 
Usually, tests are not required for bruises. However, if a broken bone is suspected, an X-ray may be required. 
If bruises are occurring for no reason or extremely frequently, blood tests may be required to confirm a platelet defect and determine if there is an underlying medical problem. 
Petechiae may be due to a platelet defect. 
Pigmented purpura may indicate capillaritis . 
Palpable purpura suggests vasculitis . 
Large bruises suggest coagulation factor deficiencies from liver disease or von Willebrand disease. 
Bleeding into the joints may indicate haemophilia. 
Ooze around catheters and blood-letting sites in a sick patient can indicate disseminated intravascular coagulation , vitamin K deficiency, or thrombocytopenia. 
When should I seek medical care? 
Urgent medical care is required if the bruising is associated with swelling and extreme pain, as it could indicate a fracture in the underlying bone. 
A medical assessment is also indicated for: 
Bruising that is more frequent or severe than normal 
Bruising for no reason 
Bleeding from the gums, from the bowel or in urine 
Significant bruising or bleeding when on blood-thinning medications 
Painful bruising under fingernails. 
What is the treatment for bruises? 
There is no particular medical treatment for bruises. However, there are some techniques that can be used at home to reduce swelling and speed up the process of healing. 
Prepare an ice pack wrapped in a towel or a cold flannel. Apply this to the affected area for 30 minutes, as soon as possible after the injury. 
If practical, keep the bruised area elevated after the injury. 
Paracetamol may help with severe pain. 
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs , such as aspirin and ibuprofen, are not recommended, as they may worsen the bleeding leading to the bruise. 
What is the outcome for bruises? 
Bruises usually take around two weeks to disappear. They may take longer to disappear from the lower legs. 
How can I prevent bruises? 
Wear protective clothing and equipment, such as shin pads, when playing sports. 
Keep furniture and other large objects away from walkways. 
Avoid obstacles, such as wires that may lead to tripping. 
If you are taking blood-thinning medication , have your blood monitored through regular tests and appointments. 
Ensure your diet has adequate vitamin C , which is found in fresh fruit and vegetables. 

ADVERTISEMENT 

References 
Kraut EH. Easy bruising. March 2016. UpToDate. Available at www.uptodate.com/contents/easy-bruising (accessed 14 August 2017) 
Neutze D, Roque J. Clinical evaluation of bleeding and bruising in primary care. Am Fam Physician 2016; 93: 279–86. Journal 

Palmer RL. Chapter 146: Excessive bleeding and bruising. In: Walker HK, Hall WD, Hurst JW (eds). Clinical methods: the history, physical, and laboratory examinations, 3rd edn. Boston: Butterworths, 1990. 
On DermNet 
Skin manifestations of haematological diseases 
Anticoagulants and antiplatelet agents 
Disseminated intravascular coagulation 
Purpura 
Vascular skin problems 
Subungual haemorrhage 
Other websites 
Contusions — Medscape 
Books about skin diseases 
Books about the skin 
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition 

ADVERTISEMENT 

Other recommended articles 

ADVERTISEMENT 

ADVERTISEMENT 

ADVERTISEMENT 

ADVERTISEMENT 

Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information 
Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information 

Join our newsletter Your email Your name Your profession Profession or specialty I am a dermatologist Primary care physician Other health professional Other (not health professional) Medical student or physician in training Patient or caregiver Marketing/media 
Join Now 

RESOURCES 
Skin checker 
PO-PASI scoring 
AI image dataset 
Quizzes 
Glossary 
Translate 

CONTACT 
Contact us 
Website feedback 
Volunteer 
Donate 

ABOUT 
About DermNet 
Editorial process 
Website terms 
Image licence 
FAQ 

Privacy policy © DermNet® 2026 

IMPORTANT NOTICE: DermNet does not provide a free online consultation service. If you have any concerns with your skin or its treatment, see a dermatologist for advice.