Title: DermNet Melasma
Source URL: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/melasma
Credibility: DermNet dermatology reference mentioning MASI and modified MASI for monitoring
Downloaded as text for local retrieval.

Melasma (facial pigmentation) 

Search DermNet Ctrl K 

Are you a healthcare professional 
GO TO DERMNET PRO 

Home 
Topics A-Z 
Images 
Cases 
Skin checker 
Give feedback 

Main menu 

Home 
Topics A-Z 
Images 
Cases 
Skin checker 
Give feedback 

Common skin conditions 
Acne Athlete's foot Cellulitis Cold sores Dermatitis/Eczema Heat rash Hives Impetigo Psoriasis Ringworm Rosacea Seborrhoeic dermatitis Shingles Vitiligo 

NEWS 
Join DermNet PRO 

Read more 

Quick links 

Skin checker 
Try our skin symptom checker 

Home 

Topics A-Z 

Melasma 

Melasma — extra information 

Synonyms: 
Chloasma, Mask of pregnancy 

Categories: 
Pigmentary disorders 

ICD-10: 
L81.1 

ICD-11: 
ED60.1 

SNOMED CT: 
36209000, 386960009 

ADVERTISEMENT 

Pigmentary disorders 
Melasma 

Authors: A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand. 1997/2014. Updated: Dr Brent J Doolan, Dermatology Research Fellow, The Skin Hospital, Sydney NSW, Australia. Dr Monisha Gupta, Dermatologist, The Skin Hospital, Sydney NSW, Australia. Copy edited by Gus Mitchell. October 2020. Minor update December 2025. 
Introduction 
Demographics 
Causes 
Clinical features 
Complications 
Diagnosis 
Differential diagnoses 
Treatment 
Outcome 

What is melasma? 
Melasma is a common acquired skin disorder that presents as a bilateral , blotchy, brownish facial pigmentation. 
This form of facial pigmentation was previously called chloasma , but as this derives from the Greek meaning ‘to become green’, the term melasma (brown skin) is preferred. It was also known as the ‘mask of pregnancy’. 
Who gets melasma? 
Melasma is more common in women than in men, with an onset typically between the ages of 20 and 40 years. Melasma is most common in people who tan easily or have naturally brown skin ( Fitzpatrick skin phototypes III, IV). It is less common in people with fair skin (Fitzpatrick types I, II) or black skin (Fitzpatrick types V, VI). 
What causes melasma? 
The cause of melasma is complex; it has been proposed to be a photoageing disorder in genetically predisposed individuals. The pigmentation ultimately results from the overproduction of melanin by melanocytes ( pigment cells); either taken up by keratinocytes ( epidermal melanosis) and/or deposited in the dermis ( dermal melanosis, melanophages ). 
Factors implicated in the development of melasma include: 
Family history — 60% report affected family members 
Sun exposure — ultraviolet and visible light promote melanin production 
Hormones — pregnancy and the use of oestrogen / progesterone -containing oral contraceptives , intrauterine devices, implants, and hormone replacement therapy, are implicated in one-quarter of affected women; thyroid disorders can be associated with melasma 
Medications and scented products — new targeted therapies for cancer and perfumed soaps, toiletries, and cosmetics may cause a phototoxic reaction to trigger melasma 
Researchers are examining the roles of stem cell, neural , vascular , and local hormonal factors in promoting melanocyte activation. 
What are the clinical features of melasma? 
Melasma presents as bilateral, asymptomatic , light-to-dark brown macules or patches with irregular borders. 
Distinct patterns include: 
Centrofacial — forehead, cheeks, nose, upper lip (sparing the philtrum); 50-80% of presentations 
Malar — cheeks, nose 
Mandibular — jawline, chin 
Erythosis pigmentosa faciei — reddened or inflamed 
Extrafacial — forearms, upper arms, shoulders in a sun-exposed distribution. 
Melasma can be separated into epidermal, dermal, and mixed types, depending on the level of increased melanin in the skin. 
Epidermal melasma 
Epidermal melasma is defined by: 
Border: well-defined 
Colour: dark brown 
Wood lamp : appears more obvious 
Dermoscopy : Scattered islands of brown reticular network with dark fine granules 
Treatment: usually has a good response. 
Dermal melasma 
Dermal melasma is defined by: 
Border: ill-defined 
Colour: Light brown to blue-grey 
Wood lamp : no accentuation 
Dermoscopy : reticuloglobular pattern, telangiectasia , arciform structures 
Treatment: usually has a poor response. 
Mixed melasma 
Mixed melasma is the most common type, and is defined by: 
Combination of blue-grey, light and dark brown colours 
Mixed patterns seen with Wood lamp and dermatoscope 
Treatment usually shows a partial improvement. 

Melasma 

Melasma 

Melasma 

Melasma 

Melasma 

Melasma 
See more melasma images . 
What are the complications of melasma? 
Melasma can have a severe impact on quality of life due to its visibility. 
How is melasma diagnosed? 
Melasma is usually a clinical diagnosis based on the clinical appearance, and examination with a Wood lamp and dermatoscope. 
Occasionally a skin biopsy may be taken. Histology varies with the type of melasma, but typically the following features are seen: 
Melanin deposited in basal and suprabasal keratinocytes 
Highly dendritic (branched) intensely pigmented melanocytes 
Melanin within dermal melanophages 
Solar elastosis and elastic fibre fragmentation 
An increase in blood vessels. 
Serial photography and severity indices such as the Melasma Area and Severity Index (MASI) or modified MASI can be used to monitor response to treatment. 
What is the differential diagnosis for melasma? 
Other disorders that may resemble melasma clinically include: 
Post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation 
Solar lentigo and other forms of lentigines and freckles 
Acquired dermal macular hyperpigmentation 
Drug-induced hyperpigmentation 
Naevus of Ota and naevus of Hori . 
What is the treatment for melasma? 
A combination of measures is generally required. 
General measures 
Year-round, life-long sun protection — broad-brimmed hat, broad-spectrum very high protection factor (SPF50+) sunscreen containing iron oxides, and sunsmart behaviour 
Discontinue hormonal contraception if possible 
Cosmetic camouflage . 
Topical therapy 
The most successful formulation has been a combination of hydroquinone , tretinoin , and moderate potency topical steroid (skin lightening cream ) reported to clear or improve 60–80%. 
Other topical agents used alone or, more commonly, in combination have included: 
Thiamidol 
Azelaic acid 
Kojic acid 
Cysteamine cream 
Ascorbic acid 
Methimazole 
Tranexamic acid 
Glutathione 
Soybean extract. 
Many other agents are under investigation. For example, 2-mercaptonicotinoyl glycine (2-MNG), which binds to certain melanin precursors, has shown promise in early clinical trials for preventing hyperpigmentation induced by ultraviolet or visible light. 
Oral treatment 
Tranexamic acid blocks conversion of plasminogen to plasmin, with downstream effects inhibiting synthesis of prostaglandin and other factors involved in melasma. 
More new oral treatments are being trialled. 
Procedural techniques 
Chemical peels and lasers can be used with caution, but carry a risk of worsening melasma or causing post- inflammatory hyperpigmentation. Patients should be pretreated with a tyrosinase - inhibitor , such as hydroquinone. 
Superficial epidermal pigment can be peeled off using alpha-hydroxy acids (AHA), such as glycolic acid, or beta-hydroxy acids (BHA), such as salicylic acid. 
Microneedling, intense pulsed light (IPL) , and lasers including Q-switched Nd:YAG , ablative and non-ablative fractionated and picosecond lasers carry a high risk for relapse and the disease becoming more resistant to treatment, so require expert use. 
What is the outcome for melasma? 
Melasma can be frustrating to treat, both for the patient and the medical practitioner. It is slow to respond to treatment, especially if it has been present for a long time. 
Even in those who get a good result from treatment, pigmentation may reappear on exposure to summer sun. 
The chronicity and risk for relapse with the need for lifelong sun protection should be emphasised to set realistic goals and outcomes. 

ADVERTISEMENT 

Bibliography 
Bala HR, Lee S, Wong C, Pandya AG, Rodrigues M. Oral tranexamic acid for the treatment of melasma: a review. Dermatol Surg. 2018;44(6):814–25. doi:10.1097/DSS.0000000000001518. PubMed 
Boukari F, Jourdan E, Fontas E, et al. Prevention of melasma relapses with sunscreen combining protection against UV and short wavelengths of visible light: a prospective randomized comparative trial. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2015;72(1):189–90.e1. doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2014.08.023. PubMed 
Handel AC, Miot LD, Miot HA. Melasma: a clinical and epidemiological review. An Bras Dermatol. 2014;89(5):771–82. doi:10.1590/abd1806-4841.20143063. PubMed 
Kheradmand M, Afshari M, Damiani G, Abediankenari S, Moosazadeh M. Melasma and thyroid disorders: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Dermatol. 2019;58(11):1231–8. doi:10.1111/ijd.14497. PubMed 
Ogbechie-Godec OA, Elbuluk N. Melasma: an up-to-date comprehensive review. Dermatol Ther (Heidelb). 2017;7(3):305–18. doi:10.1007/s13555-017-0194-1. PubMed 
Passeron T, Picardo M. Melasma, a photoaging disorder. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2018;31(4):461–5. doi:10.1111/pcmr.12684. PubMed 
Rodrigues M, Pandya AG. Melasma: clinical diagnosis and management options. Australas J Dermatol. 2015;56(3):151–63. doi:10.1111/ajd.12290. PubMed 
Sarma N, Chakraborty S, Poojary SA, et al. Evidence-based review, grade of recommendation, and suggested treatment recommendations for melasma. Indian Dermatol Online J. 2017;8(6):406–42. doi:10.4103/idoj.IDOJ_187_17. PubMed 
Sonthalia S, Jha AK, Langar S. Dermoscopy of melasma. Indian Dermatol Online J. 2017;8(6):525–6. doi:10.4103/idoj.IDOJ_6_17. PubMed Central 
Trivedi MK, Yang FC, Cho BK. A review of laser and light therapy in melasma. Int J Womens Dermatol. 2017;3(1):11–20. doi:10.1016/j.ijwd.2017.01.004. PubMed Central 
On DermNet 
Bleaching agents 
Skin changes in pregnancy 
Sun protection 
Other websites 
Melasma — Medscape Reference 
Melasma — British Association of Dermatologists 
Melasma: Tips for managing — American Academy of Dermatology 
Melasma — American Academy of Dermatology 

Books about skin diseases 
Books about the skin 
Dermatology Made Easy - second edition 

ADVERTISEMENT 

Other recommended articles 

ADVERTISEMENT 

ADVERTISEMENT 

ADVERTISEMENT 

ADVERTISEMENT 

Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information 
Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information 

Join our newsletter Your email Your name Your profession Profession or specialty I am a dermatologist Primary care physician Other health professional Other (not health professional) Medical student or physician in training Patient or caregiver Marketing/media 
Join Now 

RESOURCES 
Skin checker 
PO-PASI scoring 
AI image dataset 
Quizzes 
Glossary 
Translate 

CONTACT 
Contact us 
Website feedback 
Volunteer 
Donate 

ABOUT 
About DermNet 
Editorial process 
Website terms 
Image licence 
FAQ 

Privacy policy © DermNet® 2026 

IMPORTANT NOTICE: DermNet does not provide a free online consultation service. If you have any concerns with your skin or its treatment, see a dermatologist for advice.